Let's do another example. So, the previous example was a Class A on the 4th octet. This time we're going
to do a Class A on the 3rd octet, and this one can get a little bit confusing,
so you might need to pay attention to this one again.
So in our example, we've been allocated a Class A 60.0.0.0/8.
If we subnet it into /19 networks, how many subnets do we have, and how many hosts per subnet?
So pause the video again, and figure out the answer, and I'll see you back here with the answer.
Okay, a /19, the line is going to be after 3 bits on the 3rd octet. That leaves us
13 bits for host, 8 in the last octet, and then 5 on the right hand side of the 3rd octet.
To figure out how many hosts each network is going to support,
it's 2 to the power of 13 minus 2,
so that's 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, and 8192
minus the 2, gives us 8190
hosts per network.
And because we were allocated a Class A /8 range, the difference between a /8 and a /19
is going to be 11 bits. To figure out how many networks we have, it's 2 to the power of 11,
so we already know 2 to the power of 10 is a 1024, so we'll double that again,
that gives us 2048 subnets.
As usual,
we've got the second part of the question.
So for the IP address 60.15.10.75 /19,
What's the network address, the broadcast address, and the range of valid IP addresses?
Please pause the video as usual, and I'll see you back with the answer.
Okay, in this example, we are subnetting on the 3rd octet, the other examples, we have been subnetting
on the 4th octet. The line is after the 32 on the 3rd octet, so the network block addresses
are still going to go up in multiples of 32,
but it's just it's going to be on the 3rd octet rather than the 4th octet.
So, our network address is 60.15.0.0, you can see it if you write out the
whole IP address. Also, we're 60.15.10.75,
we're going up in multiples of 32, so obviously, 10 is less than 32.
So, the network address must be 60.15.0.0.
The next network address would be 60.15.32.0.
So the broadcast address is going to be 1 less than that on the 3rd octet, and 255 on the
4th octet.
So the broadcast address is 60.15.31.255, and the valid host addresses will be between the network
address and the broadcast address,
so that's 60.15.0.1 up to 60.15.31.254. Okay, so the value on the 4th octet in the lower
range is going to be a 1.
The higher range is going to be the 254 for the hosts.
The subnetting is done on the 3rd octet
if the subnet mask is anything between a /16 and a /24.
We can use the magic number method for the example
again. It was a /19, so a /19
that's 3 bits on the 3rd octet.
So that is 128, 192, and then
224.
We subtract 224 from 256, which gives us 32 so that we know the address
block is going up in values of 32.
Again, it's on the 3rd octet
rather than the 4th octet here.
We can figure out the same as we did in the previous slide from that
that it must be a network address of 60.15.0.0 because our value in the 3rd octet is 10.
The broadcast address, 1 less than that, 60.15.31.255, valid hosts
60.15.0.1 up to 60.15.31.254. Okay,
review this example again if you're not sure about doing it on the 3rd octet. Remember that we figured
out exactly the same way as we did when we were doing it on the 4th octet.
So the address block is figured out exactly the same way,
again. You just need to remember that on the 4th octet,
your hosts are going to go from 1 in the low end up to 254 on the high end.
Let's do one more example.
You've been asked to subnet the 134.65.0.0 network into 6 different networks.
What subnet mask are you going to use?
Please pause the video, and figure out the answer.
Okay, before I show you the answer on the next slide, let's see how we would figure this out.
The network is 134.65.0.0,
so we know it's a Class B network. And we need to split it into 6 networks,
so we're going to need 3 bits because it's 2, 4, 8.
It's a Class B, so the default subnet mask is a /16.
We need 6 networks, which was 3 bits,
so we add 3 to the /16, and that will give us a /19.
So, very easy to figure this one out,
and that's showing it there with the line on our diagram as well. Some extra information that we weren't
actually asked for in the question, a /19 in dotted decimal is 255.255.224.0, the network
addresses would be going up in blocks of 32, so 134.65.0.0
the next one, 134.65.32.0, etc., and we would have
8190 hosts in each subnet because we've got 13 bits available for the host address.
2 to the power of 13
minus 2 is 8190.
Okay, so that's just done for all of the different examples of subnetting. Hopefully, you're confident with
this now. You should be if you've worked through all of those examples, then you're going to be fine
when you do the exam. When you are on the exam, there's lots of different ways they can ask you questions
about subnetting.
But it's all going to boil down to just a few things which you can see here.
So, it could be a variation of given a network requirement of 'X' amount of subnet and 'Y' amount of hosts
per subnet.
What network address and subnet mask should you be using for each subnet?
The other basic question they can ask is if they give you a particular IP address and subnet mask, calculate
that subnets network address, the broadcast address, and the range of valid host IP addresses.
So again, it could be any variation in those questions. They may ask it in a different way.
But as long as you can answer those questions, which you can know because we've done loads of practice
examples of them, you're going to be fine for anything that they throw at you on the exam.
Okay, so that's our subnetting done.
We've still got a bit more to talk about IP addressing through, starting with private addressing in
the next lecture.